Optimal at this altitude,
I can run flat out for a half mile before my hands start shaking.
You posted a question.
I'm a cybernetic organism.
This episode is brought to you by wealth.
Front.
Wealth Front is the future of financial advice.
They become incredibly popular among my friends in silicon valley and across the
country because they provide the same high end financial advice that the best
private wealth managers deliver it to the ultra wealthy,
but for any account size and at a fraction of the cost.
For instance,
they monitor your portfolio every day across more than a dozen asset classes to
look for opportunities to rebalance or harvest tax losses.
Now,
would you do the same?
Are you doing the same?
Probably not.
And the powers and the software wealth front now manages more than $4 billion in
assets,
which is up from around 2.5 billion.
When they started advertising on this podcast,
they're growing incredibly quickly.
Unlike old fashioned private wealth managers,
wealth front is powered by innovative technology,
making it the most tax efficient,
low cost,
hassle free way to invest.
They don't have bloated sales teams or retail locations so they can deliver all
of this sophisticated financial advice and these services at a fraction of the
cost of a traditional financial advisor.
So at the very least,
go to wealthfront.com forward slash Tim and take their free risk assessment
survey.
It only takes a couple of minutes and Wealthfront.
We'll recommend a personalized portfolio of investments.
In other words,
they'll tell you exactly where they would put your money,
so even if you don't use their service,
you have a huge leg up and you have additional information for making good
decisions.
They use investment theory to automate good financial behavior and decisions
that people typically don't make,
but should so go to wealthfront.com forward slash Tim to get your first 15 k
managed for free or just to get more details,
check it out.
wealthfront.com forward slash Tim
this episode is brought to you by id,
commerce and logistics.
Known these guys for quite a while.
I'm asked all the time about how to scale businesses quickly and rule number one
is removing bottlenecks that slow you down and act as an emergency break.
For many companies.
One of the first things that should go is inventory management and fulfillment
ID.
Commerce and logistics focuses on helping online retailers and entrepreneurs
outgrow the competition by handling all of the behind the scenes details that
you don't want to,
they manage your inventory,
pick,
pack and ship and handle every possible logistics need so that you can focus on
what you're good at and the other aspects of growing your business.
I partnered with them myself during the launch of the four hour chef so that I
could focus on promoting the book what I'm good at and they insured.
They handled what they're good at.
That is keeping my readers happy with dozens of different products that needed
to be shipped out during holiday crunch season before Christmas.
Id,
commerce and logistics works with many types of businesses including ecommerce,
consumer package goods,
subscription boxes,
and dozens more,
and they're integrated with top ecommerce platform such as Shopify,
my personal favorite,
Magento,
big commerce and others,
which makes the setup,
the integration partnership all seamless.
And as a listener of this podcast,
you can get up to $10,000 of startup fees and costs waived.
That is a huge discount,
so check it out.
You can go to [inaudible] dot com forward slash Tim,
that's Id com,
log.com forward slash Tim or you can go to tim.blog forward slash scale.
That's tim.blog,
forward slash scale
hello boys and girls.
This is Tim Ferriss and welcome to another episode of the Tim Ferriss Show where
it is my job to explore and deconstruct world class performers,
people who are at the best at what they do to tease out the belief systems,
philosophies,
habits,
routines,
et Cetera,
that you can use.
This particular episode is different for a few reasons and I'm very excited
about it.
Number one,
we have our oldest guests to date 83 years,
which I want to do more of.
I want to really chronicle and investigate some of these treasures that we have
on this planet.
And uh,
so I may also be going after Don Wildman soon.
If you don't know who that is,
you will shortly.
But this time around,
we have someone I've wanted to interview for decades.
Literally.
His name is doctor Philip Zimbardo at Phil Zimbardo on Twitter.
He's one of the most distinguished psychologists in the world and a professor
emeritus at Stanford University.
He is arguably best known for his 1971 Stanford prison experiment in which
students were turned into mock prisoners and guards for continuous 24 hour a day
study.
This particular experiment was planned for two weeks but terminated after just
six days.
And we will dig into why that was the case.
And he gives a fantastic overview of this study.
In this podcast,
we also explore how we as humans can do less evil.
How you can be a deviant for a day.
And I highly,
highly,
highly encourage you all to try this.
And it's detailed in the conversation what mindful disobedience is in much more.
It was a real blast to finally get him on the phone after having read so much of
his work.
Apart from all of that,
uh,
Dr Zimbardo has served as president of the American psychological association
and designed and narrated the award winning 26 part PBS series,
discovering psychology.
He's published more than 50 books.
What?
Including Shyness,
the loose for a fact,
the time cure,
the time paradox and most recently man interrupted the time paradox is another
one that I recommend to everyone.
If you're a fan of the Tony Robbins Dickens process exercises outlined in tools
of titans,
you will love that book.
Dr Zimbardo currently lectures worldwide and is actively working to promote his
nonprofit and trust me,
this guy at 83 is more active than almost every person I know.
So you will see,
I believe you will hear phone calls going on in the background.
He's traveling all over the world,
so don't let it distract you.
Anyway,
back to his current passion and focus,
the heroic imagination project,
heroic imagination.org his current research looks at the psychology of heroism.
The question he poses is what pushes some people to become perpetrators of evil
while others act heroically on behalf of those in need.
And that is precisely among many,
many other things what we explore in this conversation.
So without further ado,
please enjoy a wide ranging conversation with doctor Philip Zimbardo
doctors and Bartow.
Welcome to the show and it can be here.
Thank you for inviting me.
I have wanted to connect with you and speak with you and I don't say this to
many people for many,
many decades.
In fact,
I was a,
at least for a period of time,
a psychology major technically in neuroscience at Princeton and was actually a
subject in some of the experiments of Danny condiments and I,
yeah,
I was indeed.
I tapped a space bar for a very long time and a very dark room and warring party
was very boring but hopefully contributed to to greater scientific progress in
some fashion.
I thought I thought we could start with people who are not familiar with your
work.
Uh,
when people think of Dr. Phillips in Bardo,
what do they tend to associate you most with in the world of psychology or
science?
My legacy for better or for worse is he all Stanford prison experiment,
which I did back in 1971.
I was recently in Budapest and I'm driving in a taxi and the taxi driver says,
you sound like an American.
I said,
yeah.
what do you do?
I said,
I'm a psychologist.
He said,
did you ever hear that study where they put a colleague students in a prison
in Budapest,
Hungary as so,
yeah.
So it's,
it's uh,
what I'm most well known for because it was,
it w it is,
it was an,
is the most dramatic study ever done in psychology in part because it went,
uh,
24,
seven.
Most research is just one hour.
Typically it fits into a student's curriculum schedule.
But this Po,
this research,
uh,
went on day and night for a week and it was supposed to go for two weeks.
Uh,
and so what was special about it is you could then see in other videos,
we took the character transformation of hour by hour,
day by day of good kids,
be getting to do really bad things.
And these were the nine guards and nine prisoners to begin with.
Yeah.
So if you want me to give a thumbnail overview,
sure.
Let's get a just for those people not familiar.
I think it'd be a great place to start.
Okay.
So the year is 1971.
Uh,
it's the 70s,
uh,
exciting things that happening in psychology.
Um,
a little bit earlier at Yale,
um,
Stanley Milgrim who was my high school classmate and James Monroe high school in
the Bronx and a 1950,
he had done the classic research on blind obedience to authority in which he got
mostly men ages 20 to 50,
not college students.
Um,
to play the role of teacher who is going to help students improve their memory
by punishing errors.
And the way they would punish the era is by giving them escalating levels.
I will electric shock to their fingers.
And what happened is the confederate who was pretending to be the student of the
teacher began after a while to yell and scream and say,
I have a heart condition.
I don't want to go on.
And the question is,
would anybody continue the experiment that kept saying to the,
to the real participant,
you must go on,
you have a contract,
you must continue teacher.
And the amazing thing is to have every three of these adults went all the way to
a foreign and 50 roles,
which in a sense could have been lethal.
Uh,
I should back up and say,
when Milgrom asks 40 psychiatrists at Yale medical school,
what percent of all Americans would go to the,
to the bitter end?
Their estimate was 1% because to do so you'd have to be a psychopath.
So they're only off by 74%.
And so,
so the point is it's two of every three.
Uh,
and so,
but his research was part of the demonstration of the power of social situations
over individual dispositions.
And I follow it up.
Am I my team at Sanford,
Craig Haney and curt banks and David Jaffe.
And I followed up by saying,
you know,
uh,
it's rare that somebody will tell you to do something horrible,
a dangerous,
typically you're playing a role and in the role and you're in a group and
everybody is doing this.
So we reconceptualize the setting as a prison and weight goes,
prisons are all about power and guards have power and prisoners try to get some,
and guards tried to limit it,
their,
um,
their attempts that power.
And so what we did is we put an ad in the Palo Alto newspaper wanted,
okay,
college students for study of prison life that could go up to two weeks.
And,
uh,
75 people answer the ad.
We interviewed,
each of them,
gave them a battery of personality tests and we picked two dozen who are normal
and healthy in every way we could,
we could imagine.
And then what happened was we randomly assign half to be guards after the
prisoners.
And,
and in that setting they became prisoners or guards.
Now of course we made it realistic.
They had you in a different kind of uniforms.
Prisoners had symbols of power.
Billy clubs,
handcuffs,
military style uniforms,
and the prisoners were in uniforms that simply had a number on it.
We took away the name,
they became a,
they became the unionized.
And the amazing thing was in 36 hours,
a normal healthy college students.
And these are not students from Stanford,
they were from all over the United States who were in the bay area finishing up
summer school,
one of the prisoners,
eight six one,
two.
I still remember if we really had an emotional breakdown,
screaming,
crying out of control.
And,
and each day thereafter another prison,
I had a similar reaction.
So we ended the study after five days because it was out of control.
And we could not imagine that
that a social situation could have such a profound impact.
But what happened was the gardens really became creatively sadistic.
There were three guards working eight hour shifts,
uh,
and there were three shifts and they were nine prisoners at any one time,
three in this cell.
And then the remaining,
they were backup guards and backup prisoners.
And so the study ended on this very down node of good kids doing really bad
things to each other,
creatively evil in the role of guard.
And this,
this has some very wide reaching implications.
It would seem,
and you've written extensively about this,
has relevance to many things that are happening in,
in our modern day today,
including,
uh,
the,
the Abu Ghraib prison scandal,
I suppose you could call it.
And it was blamed on rogue soldiers.
But,
uh,
you were one to point out that it was,
it was,
it was a bigger issue than that.
It wasn't,
you couldn't necessarily isolate a few bad actors.
Uh,
it was more of a systemic issue.
Yeah.
You hit it right on the head.
Is that for your lifted as well?
Just go back in time and 2004,
someone released,
okay.
Pictures of American prison guards in Abu Ghraib,
prison in Iraq,
humiliating,
torturing,
degrading,
sexually abusing prisoners who they should have been protecting.
So these are images that came from the cameras of the guards themselves.
And it was global disgrace to America at a time when the war in Iraq was,
was still a big,
big problem,
big issue.
And,
uh,
and what happened was,
again,
I'll read through the military,
disowned it,
say this,
their work,
a few bad apples.
And curiously I was in Washington DC when that broke.
Uh,
I had been the president of the American Psychological Association and was there
on a,
on a followup visit.
And someone from National Public Radio had been my student at Stanford where I
taught for 50 years,
call me and said,
hey,
hey doctorZ ,
those images that we just showed where the same as the images you showed us in
class of the president experiment.
Wow.
Uh,
uh,
putting bags over prisoners head stripping him naked,
et,
and so would you like to come on to be interviewed?
And I was,
and I simply said,
look at my hypothesis is that most American soldiers are good apples.
And what we have to realize it someone put them in a bad barrel and we have to
know who the bad barrel makers because that's who should be on trial.
Uh,
not,
not the soldiers at the end of the line.
And that became a,
an interesting metaphor.
Bad apples.
That's what's wrong with the individual versus bad barrels,
which is the situational analysis.
And then of course the system is the bad barrel makers,
the people who will make those situations and sustain them.
And then I actually defended shipped Frederick who is a staff sergeant who
should have been in charge of the night shift,
but he too got sucked into different quality.
They was,
they simply say we're having fun and games and they did not have any idea that
the images that they took with their cameras,
uh,
would be released to the world.
And then a few follow up questions related to that.
Uh,
and I suppose the big question in my mind is if,
if you are someone who views themselves as a good person or at worst,
a neutral person who doesn't want to do evil,
uh,
how do you avoid the circumstances or the slippery slope of evil?
Are there,
are there things that you can keep in mind or reminders that you can set for
yourself?
Things you can avoid to help to mitigate that risk.
Now,
Abby,
I'm ethic.
Great,
great way to frame it is that evil is seductive.
Um,
in fact,
Christians around the world say to their god,
lead us not into temptation.
Deliver us from evil.
Uh,
and the point is,
evil comes in many sizes,
many shapes.
There is the evil of action doing bad things,
but there's also the evil of inaction,
right?
Not,
not doing the right thing when you could.
So this,
this is what comes up in the bystander made famous,
uh,
I guess 60 years ago in New York City when a young woman was being assaulted,
Kitty Genovese and screened and scream and people heard and no one came to her
aid.
So the bystander metaphor is that people around the world do not come to the aid
of someone in an emergency who,
who needs their help.
Um,
and so this is this,
these are fundamental themes is that,
uh,
it's so easy to cross the line and all the research done in psychology,
the Milgram's study,
that Samara prison study and many,
many other experiment.
The curious thing is even though the majority gives in complies,
conforms,
there was always a minority,
10% 20%,
sometimes 30% who resists.
And so we,
I began to study what is it about those people who resist that temptation,
the power of the group,
especially when everybody else in the group is doing and say,
come on,
it's fun and games.
And so I began to think of them as everyday heroes.
I wrote a book called the Lucifer effect.
And the subtitle is understanding how good people turn evil.
And the book has 10 chapters on the prison study,
two chaps and I,
our grade,
and then a lot of chapters on evil around the world,
Bosnia and Rwanda.
And then in the end,
um,
you know,
I'm buried in evil.
I mean it took two years to write the book and I'm swimming in a sea of evil and
it was so depressing every morning to sit at my desk,
let's say,
Oh my God,
which evil am I going to deal with today?
So in Chapter 16,
if anybody in the audience has not read the book,
start with 16 and work backwards.
So 16 is really celebrating the bay now witty of heroism in the same way that
Hannah Arendt,
uh,
in the trial of Otto if Eichmann in Jerusalem talked about,
Eichmann,
uh,
as illustrating the bay.
Now any of evil that is,
here's a monster who orchestrated the deaths of millions of Jews who looks like
your Uncle Charlie.
And you know,
we'll acts like,
well,
an intelligent uncle Charlie because he was in,
he was a,
you know,
a very formal,
intelligent guy.
Uh,
but,
um,
and so I use that metaphor to say,
you know,
when we think about heroes,
we really,
you know,
think about classical hero's.
We think about Agamemnon and Achilles.
We think about modern heroes like Gandhi and Nelson Mandela,
Martin Luther King,
Mother Teresa.
But those people are lifelong heroes.
What we should really be thinking,
it's about ordinary people like any of us ordinary people who sometimes do extra
ordinary deeds of goodness,
of kindness or compassion,
and we should think of them as heroes in training.
That is each day doing daily deeds of goodness and kindness.
That is not how ROIC in and of themselves,
but they really on a path toward heroism.
And we what we think is those people when a big opportunity arises,
when there is an earthquake,
when there is a terrorist attack,
they will be the ones more likely,
uh,
to take wise and effective action.
And,
and I embodied all of that in a new program.
I started in San Francisco back in 2008 called the heroic imagination project or
hip.
And the idea is heroism really starts in the mind.
You have to think of yourself as I could be a hero rather than heroism is
something that's a job of other people or is the job of of comic book
characters.
And I'd love to dig into a few of the things that you just discussed.
So the first,
the first is,
and uh,
I love the,
the latter portion of talking about the everyday here on these components in
part because I believe very much that if we're,
if we're looking for,
I would say patterns of behavior,
I tend to agree with one of my favorite quotes,
which is arc,
a locus who's a Greek poet.
And it is,
we do not rise to the level of our expectations.
We fall to the level of our training.
So if you're focusing on these daily behaviors on a micro level than the,
the hope is that on a macro level,
like you said,
when there's an earthquake and a disaster response or something like that,
if you need to triage,
you'll be the one to take that step forward.
I've looked at,
for instance,
the Lucifer effect and some of the writing around it,
and I found a seven social processes that grease the slippery slope of evil.
And,
and I'd love to just read these off and then ask a followup question.
So the first is mindlessly taking the first small step,
the second dehumanization of others,
third deindividuation of self.
And other words,
anonymity,
then diffusion of personal responsibility,
blind obedience to authority,
uncritical conformity to group norms.
And then last week,
which you mentioned the kind of error of the evil of omission,
not commission,
that is passive tolerance of evil through inaction or indifference.
Is it possible to become more heroic by doing the very opposite.
So in other words,
making these imperatives the opposite.
Yeah.
So all of these I would embed in a broader context of okay,
the importance of situational sensitivity,
situational awareness.
So Milgrom and I highlighted the power of social situations and dominate
personality.
But it doesn't mean it's,
it's ubiquitous,
but it doesn't mean it's inevitable.
Step one is to realize your vulnerability.
All of our vulnerability,
situational forces come in many different forms,
many different shapes.
But it's,
it's always to be mindful of what is happening around you because,
and just to be aware of that situational forces,
a group pressure,
what other people are doing,
how you addressed what the situation is,
can influence your behavior.
Um,
and so some of the things that you had just mansion,
I really part of a greater sensitivity to things happening around you in the
social situation rather than in the physical environment.
And if we,
if we want to go through one,
one by one,
I can just elaborate just a little bit on each.
Absolutely.
Yes please.
So number one was mindlessly taking the f the first small step.
Yeah.
So the conclusion from the Milgram experiment should be all evil begins with 15
wells.
So in the Milgram study,
the participants had in front of them a big shock box that had 30 switches that
began with 15 volts and increased by 15 bolt increments,
1530 45 and of course there was a label above their mild shock,
strong,
moderate shock,
et cetera.
But the key is,
you know,
imagine you're sitting in front of the shock box and you see at the end it says,
danger high voltage,
350 volts,
you know,
75,
450.
You have to say to yourself,
you know,
when I pressed this first button,
what's going to keep me from continuing to press the next one and the next one,
the next one,
and,
and then would I ever want to go to 40,
50 volts?
So obviously I wouldn't.
So,
but the point is once you press 15 vols,
you are on that slippery slope of evil because it becomes easier and easier.
Uh,
and,
and when you press $15,
you know what?
Nothing happens.
The Guy,
the guy is even notice it,
but 15 bolts then is really like the first time you cheat a little bit on a test
in school.
The first time somebody tells you a sexist or racist joke and you either smile
or Giggle or laugh a little bit,
right.
Rather than say,
I think that's inappropriate.
Um,
you know,
so again,
it to be where that even though there's nothing truly negative in that first 15
volts,
it is literally on the path of what we consider a slippery slope would be.
Well,
it's going to get,
it's going to be 35.
It's going to be,
I mean,
it's going to be 75 it's going to be a hundred and then in two out of three
cases,
it gets to be 450 volts.
Right.
So being,
being very aware of the seemingly harmless gateway drugs for sure down the
slippery slope,
right?
The number two is dehumanization of others.
Yeah.
And the center of all prejudice of all discrimination is thinking about other
people as less than human.
So in our prison experiment,
we took away people's names,
which is part of your humanity.
We replaced them with numbers.
They were,
they were eight,
six,
one,
two,
four,
one six,
three,
six Oh nine.
And after a very short time,
for example,
when a Catholic priests who had been a prison chaplain came to see the
prisoners,
and by request he asked him,
what's your name,
son.
Almost all of them gave their number in a very short time.
They had accepted our dehumanization and became that number.
Now,
uh,
that dehumanization takes other forms.
So by,
by talking about,
uh,
migrants rather than people who are migrating out of danger.
Talking about in San Francisco,
we have a big problem with the homeless.
They're not homeless.
They are people who do not have a home.
So again,
it's focusing on,
these are people in different circumstances of,
of tragedy.
But one shoe,
one shoe,
once you apply a label,
it's just like saying,
and these are,
you know,
and for Italian swaps were a dirty Jew or something or that kind one.
Once you put a label on other people,
you take away their humanity and then you,
you treat them as less than human.
Yeah,
absolutely.
And I mean,
this is,
can proactively be done,
of course,
with those who orchestrate propaganda.
It's,
I mean,
it's,
it's a meaning warfare,
wartime propaganda,
whether it's a Goebbels or if you look at some of the,
the collateral that was created during World War II in the Pacific theater.
I mean,
it's on both sides.
It's the of the objective is to dehumanize your soldiers are more effective in
some cases.
Yeah.
Uh,
uh,
Sam Kane,
who's,
um,
I guess I would call them a social philosopher.
He lives nearby here in Marin.
He has a wonderful book called faces of the anime.
And when he shows with graphic visuals that before any nation goes to war,
they prepare their people to hate the other,
the enemy by having these visual depictions of them as less than human.
Uh,
and then in the end it's mothers are willing to send their sons toward
potentially die to protect them from the end,
quote the enemy.
Um,
so it's really a critical,
critical aspect.
Now,
uh,
I'm jumping ahead.
One of the ways that I work to prevent that is I am distressed and yeah,
especially now in San Francisco with,
and we have cold and rain.
No,
we have hundred,
I don't know,
7,000 homeless people on the street.
Many old ladies,
sometimes families.
So each day I decide,
am I going to give him 50 cents a dollar?
But I don't just give money to a homeless person,
but I do is I try to human eyes them I will pick someone and yeah,
in the street and then simply say hello,
I'm sure as a Marta,
what's your name?
And they're often surprised.
I shake their hand.
I give them a doll,
I say I,
I,
you know,
I wish it could be more hope your luck improves.
And I take one minute to make,
to convert that dehumanizing experience until human one.
Yeah.
And I had an occasion recently where a woman began to cry mean cause no one,
no one had done that sympathy.
Okay.
Number three,
individuation.
Yeah.
So I,
I did early research when I was at New York University before I came to
Stanford.
Simply putting people in mass,
putting people in hoods,
taking away their visual,
their visual sense,
putting them in the dark.
It's a Mardi gras effect.
We are able to show that when your identity is removed and you're in a situation
that gives you permission to be harmful,
aggressive,
you will take it.
So we did an experiment at New York University where we had college,
female college psych one females who half of them we put in hoods and we took
away the name.
They came the one,
two,
three,
four and a half of them.
We made feel special.
And then they had the opportunity to give electric shock.
They thought to other women who are trying to,
to remember material under stress.
And what we've found is college women gave twice as much electric shock to other
women when they were de individuated than when they were not.
And so when you're anonymous,
uh,
it takes away again this length,
another point,
your sense of personal responsibility.
No one knows and no one cares.
Now again,
it goes both ways in the Mardi gras.
If you're in a situation of fun and pleasure and enjoyment and lost,
if you will,
uh,
people will go that direction.
So it means that
Dee Dee individuation takes away your central organizing principle of I am
responsible for my actions.
And essentially you then go with the flow for better or for worse,
right?
It removes the social inhibitions regardless of the,
the particular type or species of,
of impulse,
whether it's towards lust or aggression or otherwise.
The next you,
you already alluded to in a sense is diffusion of personal responsibility.
Yeah.
So this ties into what we talking about bystander effect is that ordinarily we
each feel responsible for
our actions.
We feel responsible for people around us.
Certainly our friends and family neighbors.
And again,
my hero project tries to extend that to say,
you know,
the world is by neighbors.
A world is,
it could be my friends.
And all of the research on the fusion responsibility simply says that
yeah,
when you see other people like you passing by someone in need,
then they,
they create a social norm of doing nothing.
When you know,
you should be doing something and something,
sometimes it's very,
very simple,
uh,
helping somebody up who swollen down.
And so it's something that we have to guard against is that not allowing the
social norm of other people being a bad Samaritans to change,
uh,
your,
your sense it'd be a good Samaritan.
Okay.
Now,
one of the things,
there's a fascinating study I bet you probably know about it was done by John
Darley and his student,
Daniel Batson.
And it was that Princeton,
Princeton theological seminary where,
uh,
what they did was they got a bunch of Princeton theological students,
kids who are going to become ministers.
And they said,
we're studying the power of sermons and we'd like you to give this sermon on the
Good Samaritan.
Do you know that?
Of course they know that and we want you to go to from the psych lab,
goes to the recording studio,
which is down down this alleyway.
And when you get there,
there'll be waiting for you.
And we just have to record your best sermon about the Good Samaritan.
So here at good guys,
Princeton theological student,
that maybe good girls too,
who thinking about being a good Samaritan and on the way they encounter a women
in a,
in a hallway,
an alleyway,
moaning.
Clearly Anita.
Now do they help?
It turns out they help if they are told,
you know,
you have enough time.
If they told you are late,
please hurry.
An 80% passed her by 80% of the people trends at the logic on the way to give
the good Samaritan turn out to be bad Samaritans if they're in a hurry.
So for me,
that's such an important message these days where everybody is in a hurry.
We're all,
we all feel time press even worse.
We don't even notice somebody,
uh,
moaning in a corner because we're looking at,
we're walking,
looking at our iPads,
our iPhone or Ipad,
uh,
and holding a Starbucks.
And the other hand,
no,
absolutely.
This has,
this has a bunch of different paths we could travel in this conversation.
I do want to talk more about time a little bit later,
but just to return to the diffusion of personal responsibility,
this also has tremendous implications for say,
uh,
in this relates to the bystander effect,
but disaster response.
And,
uh,
as one example I did training here in northern California for nurture,
which I believe stands for northern California emergency response training or
team.
And the San Francisco lacks the right municipal resources to respond to say a
catastrophic,
very high level,
uh,
earthquake for instance.
They don't want to have the fire engines and,
uh,
medical resources to contend with a catastrophe of that scale.
So they train volunteers,
the fire department and Police Department train volunteers to help in such a
case.
And one of the things that they teach is in a group emergency triage situation.
If your team,
if you decide to take control of that situation and try to lead that,
you never,
that you always identify individuals in the group first and assign them specific
tasks.
You and you get their attention.
Do this,
you do that because if it's a generic command to the group,
nothing's going to happen.
Yeah.
You again,
for your list,
if we turn it around,
if you are ever the victim,
if you are ever heard and there are people around you,
the way you get help is you simply say,
you,
you point at someone,
you w with the,
with the green dress,
you with,
uh,
the,
Brown blazer or you,
you red head.
So you single them out and you break down that,
that,
uh,
anonymity of the group and you're much more likely to get help.
So what they're telling you know,
what they're telling you in terms of being an emergency.
Respond.
I'm saying if you,
the victim,
the same principle holds absolutely.
The next is blind obedience to authority.
Well,
it say again,
we are all trained as children to obey our parents.
Our teachers,
uh,
are,
religious leaders in some cases our politicians.
But nobody teaches us the distinction between authorities that deserve our
respect and authorities that do not,
not all parents,
not all ministers.
We certainly know from the,
uh,
um,
horrific consequences of sexual abuse by thousands of Catholic priests over
dozens of years that a lot of,
lot of such people don't deserve our respect.
But no way do we get training in differentiating,
you know,
uh,
appropriate from inappropriate authorities,
authorities that deserve respect versus authorities that deserve defiance.
And so,
again,
I think in most societies we ere the direction of,
well,
you know,
just obey authority.
And an amalgam studies shows how easy it is for that to get overextended.
So the authority in the Milgram study,
it was a guy in a white lab coat.
He was actually a high school biology teacher.
He had,
he,
he knew nothing about psychology.
He was just recruited by him.
Milgrom and here he had,
uh,
milk and Milgram's study.
They tested a thousand people.
So here he had hundreds and hundreds of adults in new haven,
Connecticut blindly following his orders.
The shock more and more.
Okay.
And he was not an expert.
He just had the,
the white lab coat of,
of science.
So again,
it's,
it's be wary of authorities wearing false lab coats.
Is there,
is there any particular recommendation that you would have for someone who wants
to train themselves to
more consciously questioned or assess authority?
Is there any type of mental practice that you have for yourself or question that
you asked yourself on a regular basis to help with that?
I think this is a very divisive problem that we have in the United States and
certainly not limited to the United States right now in many respects.
But if somebody wanted to train themselves to be better at avoiding blind
obedience to authority,
is there any,
any particular recommendation you would have?
Yeah,
I think it's again,
questioning.
I mean,
legitimately questioning to say,
uh,
why should I do that?
What are the positive consequences if I do it?
What are the negative consequences of,
I don't,
rather than assuming if somebody says do that because they are an authority,
um,
that without debt directly questioning their authority or power.
I think you have,
they have,
the burden has to be on them to be willing to explain to you why you should,
you should do what they say and they have to give you a good enough reason.
And it can't be because I said so.
I mean,
again,
many parents say you have to do it because I said so.
Well,
at some point you have to say that's not a reason.
You know,
that that's an opinion.
That's an authority.
Um,
and,
and that,
and then ultimately you have to be willing to challenge it.
And when you're challenged,
it's already there will,
there will be some penalties.
You know,
if you're a kid,
you get slapped in the face by it,
by your parents,
you get,
but I still,
you have to,
I think you'd have to practice mindful disobedience,
mindful disobedience.
I like that.
The next is uncritical conformity to group norms.
Yeah.
All of us as,
especially as teenagers,
when reforming our identities,
when nothing in the world is more important to be popular tab kids like us,
uh,
that we are willing to become them,
that we dress like them.
The music we like is there music,
our hair,
whether we have tattoos,
whether we have piercing,
you know,
all depends on who our peer group who are in group is.
And the problem is they begin to have enormous power over us.
So if you're a peer group begins to smoke den Kansas,
are you going to be smoking?
And if you start smokey,
you're going to die young.
If they are taking drugs,
you not only take dry,
you take their kind of drug,
uh,
if they are discriminating against God,
it's guys discriminate against girls.
Uh,
you do the same if they discriminating against,
you know,
uh,
outside is um,
people different than you.
So
boobs have enormous power to shape our behavior,
our way of thinking,
our attitudes as an individual.
You have to separate out what parts of that group am I willing to go along with
because I want to be accepted.
I don't want to be rejected.
And what parts are unacceptable.
That is,
I should be willing to be rejected rather than to,
um,
uh,
to do some of the things that they would like me to do.
One way to be aware of the influence people have on you is to be a deviant for a
day.
And the simplest thing to do is you put on with a magic marker that is erasable
a square on your forehead
and that once you put it on,
you know,
you look in the mirror and you see where it is and then you don't see it
anymore.
And people are going to say,
what is that?
It's this,
it's nothing.
It's a square.
I'm just trying something out.
UV intensity very quickly how people put pressure on you to take it off.
You're not different,
you're not different in any way,
just a little mark on your forehead.
And so what we find is very difficult to resist the temptation to just wipe it
off because then you're doing what they want you to do.
And the idea is if we can resist one day,
eight hours,
then suddenly you realize you have this inner power to be your own person.
And,
and especially that with parents.
I mean mothers get crazy,
you know,
you're your best friend eve and said,
come on and take it off here.
It's you're embarrassing them.
But you know,
by extension,
so I invite your list is to try that game of being a deviant for a day.
Simply put a square with a magic eraser,
a magic mark on your forehead,
a small square a and keep it on for a day and just notice first the pressure
people put on you to be what they want you to be taken off and you'll feel the
temptation they'd do what they want you to do.
But the learning message is that be sensitive to the pressure of people put on
you to be what they want you to be in other ways to like their kind of music
they dress the way they do,
to share in their political views,
et cetera.
I used to have my students at Stanford do things like that,
but also dress,
dress up if you usually dress down,
dress down if you usually dress up or do you just do some,
some weird stuff and watch how people get really upset at you.
For very small deviations from what they think is ordinary and normal.
So I love,
I love this type of exercise and I,
I want to double down and encourage just like you did listeners to try this
deviant for a day with the,
with the square,
the erasable is important folks.
So do this with a sharpie on your forehead and take a photo,
put it on social.
Tell us what happened because I appreciate that.
Yeah,
absolutely.
Because these,
these types
of,
uh,
I've called them comfort challenges in the past I think are so,
so critical.
I've had,
for instance,
some of my readers before go to a Starbucks and just lay down on the floor for
five seconds and then get back up and a people behave.
Doing something like that helps you to inoculate yourself against harmful
conformity.
And it also makes me think a lot of a Keto,
for instance,
considered the best or the perfect stoic by Seneca and others who would
deliberately wear,
say,
tunics of unfashionable colors to subject himself to ridicule so that he would
learn to be ashamed of only those things worth being ashamed of.
So I love this idea.
I love,
I absolutely love it.
The last one is passive tolerance of evil through inaction or indifference.
Yeah.
So that ties into that.
If you share responsibility,
again,
there's evil of action doing bad things,
bullying,
uh,
hearing,
prejudice points of view.
But there's also,
um,
I'm not doing it yourself,
but accepting by others.
I always think of the case of my uncle Charlie who at family gatherings would
tell the same jokes.
Uh,
it was either a sexist jokes or racist jokes and after awhile people would be
horrified,
but no one would say to Uncle Charlie,
I wish you wouldn't do it.
And so one of the issues is how do you have courageous conversations with people
like Uncle Charlie who may,
is probably unaware of the negative impact he's having.
A partly has been telling this,
these jokes for years and years when it was more socially acceptable.
And how do you have a courageous conversation,
for example,
to say she,
Uncle Charlie,
I love the way you got it.
I love the way you try to make us all feel happy and relaxed and tell jokes.
But maybe you should tell a different kind of joke because some people wouldn't
understand what you mean about black people or,
or women with whether or not to have big breasts.
No.
Uh,
and,
and I think we're going to like it even more.
So the key is you want to change behavior and the key without the person
becoming defensive and really saying,
you know,
screw you,
I do whatever I want.
No,
it's,
um,
reminds me of a few things.
There's a quote that I really like from Ayaan Hirsi Ali,
she's equate,
which is a tolerance of intolerance,
is cowardice.
And I think that that is certainly one way to look at it.
And there's a,
there's a book that is very helpful and it's,
it's,
it might seem to be not directly related,
but it does tie in nicely.
There's a book called lying by,
it's a very short book by Sam Harris,
who's a neuroscience phd.
Yeah,
I know him.
Yes.
And it's,
it's,
it's a,
it's a fantastically powerful and concise book about the damage done by white
lies or not speaking truth.
Right.
And it is,
uh,
it is,
it is a really powerful,
uh,
dense tome in,
in the best possible way.
I'd love to if,
if,
uh,
if we have some time to explore it.
I'd love to talk about the time paradox.
Oh,
sure.
Time came up,
uh,
in if in a few cases earlier and the importance and impact of perception of time
in the case of the,
the goods,
the,
the would be good Samaritans who when rushed 80% running by the person in need.
And,
uh,
I think you've written this,
that every significant choice,
every important decision we make is determined by our perception of time.
This is something I'd like to explore.
Could you please describe for people the,
uh,
the time paradox and,
and,
and uh,
perhaps just to give them an overview of why you wrote that book.
Happy to do it.
The reason that I called my book,
the time paradox,
which I wrote with John Boyd,
who now I was like a Stanford graduate student now works for Facebook is it's a
paradox because we're arguing that the most important influence on all your
decisions are the big ones,
the small ones and decisions it will lead with liens.
Ut or actions is something inside of you that you're unaware of and what it is.
It's your sense of time,
perspective and time perspective is the way you categorize and partition.
You are sensitive time into categories of the big ones,
that past,
present,
and future.
And what what we've discovered is it's much more complex and subtle so that all
of us live in multiple time zones.
For some of us,
if I ask you,
tell me about your past,
uh,
tell me your recollections of your childhood.
Tell me your recollections of what happened last year.
But some people,
their answers are always focused around all,
it's a good thing.
Okay,
good times,
good awards,
successes,
birthday parties.
For others it's all the negatives,
failures,
regrets,
things you could've done should have done abuse of various ways.
And we now categorize those as people who live in the past,
positive or pass negative.
And then when I asked you about your present for some people,
people we call it present heatedness,
we'll outline all the fun things they do,
all the pleasures they get out of life,
seeking knowledge,
seeking sensation,
seeking novelty.
Uh,
other people are present.
Fatalists they say it doesn't pay to plan for the future.
I don't control my life is controlled by faith.
And this is true.
If you're a Muslim,
Allah controls your future.
Now,
there are two ways in the future.
So once future orientation is probably most of your listeners,
uh,
focus on what do I have to do now to achieve objectives and goals that will take
place in the future.
So these are positive future,
a future of hope,
future possibilities.
Um,
there's two other ways to be future oriented.
One is future negative that you're anxious.
Will I be able to see,
will I be able to achieve?
Uh,
and so the future instead of being filled with hope is filled with anxiety.
And a third way to be future oriented is we called transcend dental future that
I live my life so that when I die I will go to heaven rather than a hell.
Uh,
and so,
um,
it's a different kind of system.
I'm not seeking success.
I'm thinking behaving in a way to be seen as a good person on,
on Judgment Day.
And I've developed a scale,
the Zimbardo time perspective,
inventory Z,
TPI,
which,
which when you take it,
it gives you scores on each of these dimensions.
And if you order my website,
it's the time paradox.com you can take the scale and you get,
you get immediate feedback on your scores.
Now what's critical is we've discovered with lots and lots of research is that
the most important thing in life is to have what we call a balanced time
perspective.
Be Pp,
which means being high on past positive,
being moderately high on future so that you're not a workaholic,
a positive future.
And being moderate on present hedonism,
which is selected when you do as a reward for doing,
achieving a good deeds with your future orientation.
So there's lots of research that show people how high a balanced time
perspective are physically healthier,
psychologically healthier,
achieve more.
Um,
that always,
and this is research from around the world are these are much,
these are the most successful people psychologically on an with even within the
business world.
So this research that I started back in 19,
I guess about 2000,
we now have an international time perspective group.
Hundreds and hundreds of young researchers and in many countries around the
world,
we meet biannually in Portugal and more so in,
uh,
Copenhagen next year,
next year we'll meet in Marcy,
meet and talk about research we're doing.
And it's not just research,
it's application.
So these ideas are in psychotherapy and family therapy,
uh,
and,
and clearly in business.
Uh,
so and so it's something I'm really proud of that just a little research idea.
And as I said,
partly came out of the Stanford prison experiment where everybody's sense of
time was distorted because,
because to evil of the guards made every hour of feel,
I feel like,
you know,
many,
many more hours.
What are some of the changes that readers of the time paradox have made in their
own lives or that attendees,
for instance,
uh,
at the time perspective conference have made in their own lives as well as a
result of this work?
Does anything come to mind?
Oh,
be sure.
I mean,
well,
you know,
but people live in the past negative,
any extreme.
This is post traumatic stress disorder.
You know,
one third of all American beds coming back from Iraq,
Afghanistan are suffering with PTSD,
which is,
which in traditional treatment is incurable.
We drug them,
keep it from getting worse.
We've developed a time perspective therapy and with my colleagues in Maui,
uh,
Rick and Rosemary Sword in which we are able in eight sessions till quote cure,
in our sample was like 32 vets with extreme case of PTSD.
And part of it is teaching them about the psychology of time perspective and
converting each of those negatives into a positive.
Yes,
of course,
you know,
it's,
it's not,
it's not undermining the negative Esu.
Best Buddy died in your arms.
Yes,
you saw children being sexually abused.
But now we're going to do is when a put in positive slides in your slide tray.
I'm using an old metaphor.
Uh,
uh,
you know,
did you,
did your family right to you while you're there?
Did you make any friends?
Um,
uh,
did you do,
did you do any good deeds?
So now clearly what's happening,
people have this negative time perspective.
They have just loaded up.
They've just exaggerated Ms. Focus on a few negatives as if that's what well,
there was even people who have had abuse and a life that had that literally had
some real abuse.
You say,
you know,
we want you,
we are to help you elaborate on all the good things in your life.
Uh,
yes.
So one teacher embarrassed you.
Tell us about all the teachers who praise you.
Tell us about all the teachers who made you feel special.
So again,
it's literally possible,
uh,
if you understand the psychology of time perspective,
change your own time perspective and your time perspective of others.
So again,
in the time paradox and our other book is called the time.
We give very specific suggestions.
If you want to be more future oriented,
here's what you can do.
Do you want to be,
again,
the problem with being too future oriented is you become a workaholic.
So how do you put some present hedonism,
joy into your life?
Uh,
and,
uh,
so again,
I try,
I try to go from being a general research or trying to discover how the mind and
body and behavior work to always saying,
how can we use these ideas to make our life better,
richer,
more productive,
uh,
and,
simply to take the joy in being a human being.
I mentioned before we started recording,
but the,
the fact that I received,
uh,
an early galley copy of the time paradox,
it must have been,
I'm gonna say they child right?
It,
the big,
no,
it must've been 2008 or,
or very late 2007,
I think 2008.
And,
uh,
I,
I found it very impactful and underlined a lot in that book.
And I ended up among other things in the each,
each morning in the,
this is a recent implementation,
but I have a a five minute journal routine where I try to present state ground
myself with a few things like gratitude bullets and so on before going onto the
goal setting so that I'm not anxious and constantly future focus.
But one of the affirmation,
so to speak,
that I found most helpful is I am unrushed and this,
this,
this comes back directly to the story about the,
the Good Samaritans from the theological seminary.
And uh,
it,
it's proven to be incredibly therapeutic for me.
I would encourage people to check out the time paradox.
I found,
I found it to be a brilliant exploration end.
Also,
a lot of what you've written about corresponds to one of the most powerful
exercises that I've experienced and studied of Tony Robbins.
He has a process and it calls the dickens process and the dickens process refers
to the ghost of Christmas,
past,
present,
and future.
And,
and taking people through these different tenses,
uh,
in a number of respects too.
Like you said,
a replace or at least augment some of the slides in their current slideshow.
Yeah,
Beth,
a great,
I mean,
again,
we all tell the story of know Dickens and screwed and living in the past,
present and future.
The point is we have to,
we have to combine those that how do we,
when we think about the past,
how do we embellish it?
And Richard,
when we,
but we wanted joy.
We want to live in a moment.
We want to enjoy the president of family,
friends,
fun in the,
we now know the importance of,
uh,
spending time outside in the natural environment,
not living at our desks,
you know,
uh,
or a cell cell phone environment.
Uh,
and again,
we want to have hope.
Possibility is in the future.
How do we shape our past and present to make us ready to enjoy the best in the
future?
And also to think the future is always shapeable modifiable by our actions.
Now,
the other thing I should add here is that one of the ideas we I promote in the
heroic imagination project is we are most effective in,
in teams,
in small groups.
I call them a hero squads.
So when you want to challenge authority,
when you do it alone,
authority dismisses you as a fanatic.
When you have three or more people who agree with you and you confront
authority,
then it is a point of view.
When you say,
we believe,
sir,
that what you're doing is not appropriate,
is not in our best interest.
They can't dismiss you individually.
So again,
when,
uh,
when you're challenging unjust authority in the classroom,
in,
in a organization and the church,
whatever it is,
it is always better to do it as part of a small operating,
uh,
team is the defining difference between here and all truism the resistance of
some type of authority figure or authority.
Is it,
is that one of the differentiators?
No,
no,
no.
The key they came between altruism is doing social good.
Heroism is doing civic virtue.
The differences.
Altruism is heroism.
Light.
The key,
the key is apt to be a hero.
It's to take action on behalf of others in need or defending a moral cause.
And the key now is aware of potential risks and costs to you.
So I give,
I give blood to blood bank,
I give money to homeless people who are homeless.
Uh,
I do,
I work in a soup kitchen.
It doesn't cost me anything except a little bit of time.
So any extreme of heroism,
you die.
Okay.
Uh,
you lose your,
you risk your life,
your real life and limb,
uh,
whistleblowers often lose their job.
It don't get promoted.
But the key is just a perception.
I'm doing this despite the fact that there could be a cost,
that there is some potential risk to me.
And even though I'm aware of that,
nevertheless,
I continue to do it.
If you have five more minutes,
oh,
I have all the time in the world.
I just want to be respectful of your time.
I definitely have time.
So I will tie in this last thing with the prison experiment.
And the reason why I ended the study,
and it also ties to heroism.
Um,
so the Stanford prison study
and was scheduled to go for two weeks,
I doubt if I could have really gone more than a week,
I probably would have gone,
it started on Sunday.
I probably would have gone to the following Sunday to make it,
you know,
a full week,
partly because it was overwhelmingly stressful.
Um,
it wasn't clear to me what it meant to have an experiment that runs night and
day continuously,
uh,
and with me to graduate students and one undergraduate and then one graduate
student had to leave in the middle of the study,
had a family emergency.
So we have me and two students working 24,
seven prisons or having a breakdown every single day.
Parents are coming for visiting day at his parole board hearings for prisoners
who want to,
who want to leave.
Uh,
there's visiting a prison chaplains,
there's rumor of escape plan is all these things happening.
And of course I'm in charge and I'm sleeping on a couch in my office on the
second floor,
the psychology department,
Jordan Hall.
Um,
and so I'm overwhelmed with stress,
but,
um,
I'm going to keep it,
probably keep it going till till the weekend.
And then on Thursday night,
my girlfriend,
Christina Maslack,
uh,
who had been a graduate student at Sampson who just got a job at Berkeley,
um,
to start in September,
uh,
said she was working at the Stanford Library and you know,
could we have dinner,
uh,
an evening.
So I had to come down on Thursday night.
So study started August 14th,
1971,
so this is like five days in a row.
And I said,
you know,
come down and then we'll go out to dinner.
And what she sees is what is listed on my schedule as the 10 o'clock toilet run
at 10 o'clock was the last time prisoners could go to a real toilet.
After that,
they had to urinate and defecate in a bucket in that cell,
which they hated it to do because it smelled terrible.
So the guards used the guards on the night shift.
And the night shift was,
was the worst one,
just as a novel grave.
The night shift was,
was were all the disaster took place,
partly because they thought nobody was looking,
um,
that the guards lined the prisons up,
put bags for paper,
bags over their head,
chain their legs together,
start a yelling and cursing and you know,
abusing them in every way.
This is at Stanford,
at this in the Stanford prison experiment,
right?
And the same thing and above grade,
but in the same prison.
Right.
So I look up,
I'm looking through a one,
a one way screen.
And for me it's a checkmark on my daily schedule,
you know,
eight o'clock breakfast,
10 o'clock visiting day,
12 o'clock lunch,
two o'clock parole board hearing.
It's a 10 o'clock toilet room.
And I,
I look at my Christina,
I say,
Hey,
look at that isn't an interesting,
she begins to tear up and runs out,
runs out to the quad and try to,
um,
uh,
Jordan Hall stamp.
And I run out,
we have this big argument and I'm saying,
you don't understand the dynamics of human nature has seen,
seen this before,
an action,
et cetera.
And she says,
stop.
These are not prisoners.
These are not guards,
they're boys and they are suffering and you are responsible.
And then she says,
you have been changed by the power of the situation more than anyone.
Yeah.
And how could you not see the suffering that is obvious.
And I'm still arguing.
And then she says,
stop,
uh,
if this is the real you,
I don't think I want to continue my romantic relationship with you.
We had just moved in together.
We've thinking of,
you know,
living together and getting married.
And so,
so the tie back to the point I made,
so this is heroism and action.
She saying,
I'm willing to pay the costs of giving up a lifetime with you.
Uh,
and you know,
we were very much in love.
Uh,
uh,
if you don't come to your senses that she never said you have to end this study.
She just said,
you know,
you have to realize,
uh,
that,
that your perception is being distorted by the role you're playing as prison
superintendent.
And at that moment I said,
oh my God,
you're right.
Uh,
we had dinner at like midnight and then I ended this study in the next day.
So,
so this is the best example I know of heroism,
an action ordinary person,
uh,
you know,
a former student confronting authority and just making it clear that you know,
that she is willing to pay this price,
you know,
in order to challenge this,
uh,
moral injustice that that was,
that was happening.
That is a great story and I think it's,
I think it's a great place to wrap up for,
for today,
this installment.
We're practically neighbors,
so it'd be lovely to know that person at some point,
but I really appreciate you taking the time doctor Zimbardo this has been,
uh,
a dream conversation of my for a very long time,
so I really appreciate you carving out the time in your schedule.
You seem to be as,
as,
as occupied and engaged as ever with the world.
Also,
I should mention that,
that I no longer at t I teach at stamp and maybe once a year I give them a model
lecture to introductory psych.
I taught more students and more different courses than any professor and Sam and
history.
I had classes over a thousand students in an introductory side,
but now I go around the world and I do,
I do training in our heroic imagination project in Hungary and Poland and
Sicily,
Suna,
Czech Republic in Bali and Australia.
Um,
so I keep busy two days,
certainly do.
And you,
you taught,
well you taught for I guess a 57 years.
Is that right?
Retired after officially retired after teaching for certainly 50 plus years.
But you're still teaching.
That's the beauty of it.
You've just chosen a different,
uh,
different,
vehicle through which to teach.
And uh,
the first foremost,
thank you for,
for jumping on the phone and have to everybody listening.
Uh,
you can find the show notes,
links to all of these books,
articles,
studies,
and so on as usual in the show notes where you can find links to every other
episode as well@fourhourworkweek.com forward slash podcast all spelled out.
And until next time,
thank you for listening.
Hey guys,
this is Tim again.
Just a few more things before you take off.
Number one,
this is five bullet Friday.
Do you want to get a short email from me?
Would you enjoy getting a short email from me every Friday that provides a
little more soul of fun before the weekend and five bullet Fridays,
a very short email where I share the coolest things I've found or that I've been
pondering over the week.
That could include favorite new albums that I've discovered.
It could include Gizmos and gadgets and all sorts of weird shit that I've
somehow dug up in the uh,
the world of the esoteric as I do.
It could include favorite articles that I've read and that I've shared with my
close friends for instance.
And it's very short.
It's just a little tiny bite of goodness before you head off for the weekend.
So if you want to receive that,
check it out.
Just go to four hour work week.com that's four hour workweek.com all spelled out
and just drop in your email and you'll get the very next one.
And if you sign up,
I hope you enjoy it.
This episode is brought to you by ID commerce and logistics.
Known these guys for quite a while.
I'm asked all the time about how to scale businesses quickly and rule number one
is removing bottlenecks.
It slow you down and act as an emergency brake for many companies.
One of the first things that should go is inventory management and fulfillment
ID.
Commerce and logistics focuses on helping online retailers and entrepreneurs
outgrow the competition by handling all of the behind the scenes details that
you don't want to if they manage your inventory,
pick,
pack and ship and handle every possible logistics need so that you can focus on
what you're good at and the other aspects of growing your business.
I partnered with them myself during the launch of the four hour chef so that I
could focus on promoting the book what I'm good at and they insured.
They handled what they're good at.
That is keeping my readers happy with dozens of different products that needed
to be shipped out during holiday crunch season before Christmas.
Id,
commerce and logistics works with many types of businesses including ecommerce,
consumer package goods,
subscription boxes,
and dozens more,
and they're integrated with top ecommerce platform such as Shopify,
my personal favorite,
Magento,
big commerce and others,
which makes the setup,
the integration partnership all seamless.
And as a listener of this podcast,
you can get up to $10,000 of startup fees and costs waived.
That is a huge discount,
so check it out.
You can go to [inaudible] dot com forward slash Tim that's Id com,
log.com forward slash Tim or you can go to tim.blog forward slash scale.
That's tim.blog forward slash scale.
This episode is brought to you by wealth front.
Wealth Front is the future of financial advice.
They become incredibly popular among my friends in silicon valley and across the
country because they provide the same high end financial advice that the best
private wealth managers deliver to the ultra wealthy.
But for any account size and at a fraction of the cost,
for instance,
they monitor your portfolio every day across more than it does an asset classes
to look for opportunities to rebalance or harvest tax losses.
Now,
would you do the same?
Are you doing the same?
Probably not.
And the power's in the software.
Wealth Front now manages more than $4 billion in assets,
which is up from around 2.5 billion.
When they started advertising on this podcast,
they're growing incredibly quickly.
Unlike old fashioned private wealth managers,
wealth front is powered by innovative technology,
making it the most tax efficient,
low cost,
hassle free way to invest.
They don't have bloated sales teams or retail locations,
so they can deliver all of this sophisticated financial advice and these
services at a fraction of the cost of a traditional financial advisor.
So at the very least,
go to wealthfront.com forward slash Tim and take it.
They're free.
Risk Assessment survey.
It only takes a couple of minutes and Wealthfront,
we'll recommend a personalized portfolio of investments.
In other words,
they'll tell you exactly where they would put your money.
So even if you don't use their service,
you have a huge leg up and you have additional information for making good
decisions.
They use investment theory to automate good financial behavior and decisions
that people typically don't make,
but should.
So go to wealthfront.com/tim to get your first 15 came managed for free,
or just to get more details,
check it out.
wealthfront.com forward slash temp.